>> Welcome to the perspective unit of
week three in which we do two things.
First of all,
we answer frequently asked questions
that typically come up when we
teach how to build memory systems.
And, we use this opportunity also
to say also some disclaimers
about various things that we
covered during this week.
So, the first question that I'd
like to talk about is as follows.
During this week, we used flip flop
gates without actually building them.
We treated them as black box abstractions.
What does it take to
actually build a flip flop?
So, Norm,
maybe you will take this question.
>> In many courses on computer hardware,
students are taught on how to construct
flip flop gates from basic NAND gates.
Once that is done,
they continue with the usual thing,
which is also done in practice of
a complete separation between the way you
use combinatorial circuiting and
the way you use sequential circuiting.
But in the beginning, they do construct
the, a flip-flop from basic NAND gates.
In our course, we decided to skip that
part and really focus on at the beginning
and the difference between
the combinatorial point of view and
the sequential point of view.
Nevertheless, it is probably a good idea
to see the main trick how can you get
NAND gates to remember anything.
And, this is as follows.
So, the basic idea is to take two NAND
gates and connect them in a loop.
[SOUND] So, we have here two inputs,
each one fitting into one NAND gate.
Where the other input of the NAND gate is
fed the output of the previous NAND gate.
Now normally, this is a no-no.
You're not supposed to,
to connect combinatorial gates in a loop.
In fact, the hardware simulator we give
in this course explicitly forbids it, and
this is done for pedagogic reasons.
Now, let us see how this thing works
in this particular case
where it's actually used.
So normally, this kind of circuit
is supposed to be used when
both of its inputs are set to one.
Now in this situation, we don't know what
this non gate will do because we don't yet
know what this input is.
So, because we don't know what the
previous value, or the previous there is
no real previous here, but
we don't know what the value here is.
So, we don't know what
the value of the input is and
we don't know what the value of the output
is, so at the beginning, we know nothing.
But then, what happens once we
take one of these inputs and
turn it to zero for a while?
At this point,
because this is a NAND gate,
we can immediately see that the output
of this gate is going to be one,
independently of what
this question mark was.
Once this is 1,
we know that this is going to be 1,
the output of this NAND
gate is going to be 0.
Now once this is zero, we can fill in
this question mark and make it zero.
And then, we have two zeros as our output
one and everything is very stable here.
Now so, what's so interesting about it?
Now, let us see what happens when this
input is go, goes up back to one.
In this case, nothing changes.
Because this is a NAND gate,
this output remains one, so
these two remain one these remain zero,
these remain zero.
And, everything is completely stable.
So somehow, we remember now that the last
input that became zero was this
one because we have a zero here.
Now, let us see what happens
when something changes.
For example,
where at a different time stamp,
at the future time point,
this one becomes zero.
Now once this becomes zero, this
immediately, the output here becomes one.
The output here becomes one.
This becomes one.
The output here becomes zero.
This changes to zero, and again this
stays one, so we're again stable.
Now, when we turn this back to one,
to the normal state of one,
everything remains the same
because one and zero is still one.
So, everything is completely
stable in this new situation,
which is different than the previous
one because now we have zero here and
one here, where previously,
we had the opposite value.
So now,
we remember that the last input that had,
was, went down to zero was the bottom one.
And, this kind of behavior
allows this loop basically
to remember the last input wires
that went to zero, and it's stable
in each of two different situations
that's why, why flip flop is called.
Why this,
that's why the name is flip flop.
It can either flip, so
we have zero here and one here, or
flop, that we have one here and zero here.
In any case, a change,
a momentary change in the input
changes the output for the future.
Now, this is just a basic functionality
that gets you to remember stuff.
Of course, when you want to actually
use this in a nice flip flop
like we have used the flip flop, you first
of all need to put something around it,
which actually makes sure that
the inputs are behaving nicely.
And the, I choose which one of
the outputs you want to take.
And also, you need to actually
have somehow, separate the,
what happens within one clock cycle,
from what happens in the next clock cycle.
And, that is done by usually by
putting another one of these and
driving one of them with a clock, and the
another with the opposite of the clock.
But, we don't want to get
into these details, but
just to show the basic idea,
which is quite surprising
how you can remember something even
though you only have a NAND gate.
So, thank you, Naan for this explanation,
which indeed was somewhat intricate.
And a follow up question that
typically comes up is that
is NAND gate the only basic technology for
building memory systems today?
>> Well, Shimun, the truth is this is not
the only way to construct flip flops.
In many other cases,
flip flops are constructed
using some basic physical properties of
the underlying solid state physics, that,
of the devices that are used for
this kind of storage.
Now, this kind of details of such devices
and how they remember anything is really
physics or electrical engineering and not
something that we touch in this course.
>> Okay, so here's the next question.
During this week, we built a memory
device which you called RAM.
Is this the only memory device
that the computers use?
Well, the answer is definitely not.
Computers use various kinds of
memory devices of which the RAM
is indeed the most important one.
The RAM, which stands for random access
memory stores both data and instructions.
And, it is a volatile device, meaning that
it depends on an external power supply.
So, once you disconnect the computer
from the power supply or
turn it off, the contents of
the RAM is effectively erased.
So, in addition to the RAM unit,
computers also typically
use another device called ROM,
which stands for read only memory.
So, the ROM is not only read-only,
it is also a non-volatile device,
unlike the RAM.
Which means that it maintains its
current contents a long time,
over time and it does not depend
on an external power supply.
Which makes it very convenient because
the ROM is where you want to put
the programs that have to work
when you turn on the computer.
You know, this is what is
known as the booting process.
So, when you boot up the computer,
the program, which is stored or
pre stored in the ROM starts running.
And, this program normally
initializes all sorts of things,
in the operating system and
in the computer.
Actually, not in the operating system,
but in lower level code.
And, the next thing that the ROM does is
or the program that resides in the ROM
does, it clones from the disc the startup
code of the operating system.
And then finally, we begin to see
some windows on the screen and
the computer sort of comes alive.
Another technology which you've probably
heard of is called flash memory.
And, flash memory is is
a technology which actually
combines the good things of
both the RAM and the ROM.
On the one hand it's
a read read write memory.
You can both read and modify its contents.
And at the same time it does not depend
on an external power supply like the ROM.
So, once you turn off the computer.
The contents of the flash
memory remains intact.
So, we talked about RAM, ROM, flash.
Another kind of memory which which you
normally encounter is called cache memory.
So, the question is, what is cache
memory and why do we need it?
>> When one actually builds a computer,
the memory is going to be a pretty
costly part of the whole system.
And as you can expect,
there are many different technologies for
building memories.
And, the faster the memory,
is the more expensive it usually is.
The larger the memory,
the more expensive it usually is.
So, an architect, a computer architect
is always faced with a trade off of
that we want to put more money into
the memory and make it larger and faster.
Or, does we want to get a cheaper memory,
and maybe put the money more
in the processing unit?
A usual tradeoff is to have a large,
cheap memory,
maybe slow also, and a very small,
expensive, fast memory.
And, try to make sure that what the,
that does it is very often need,
need used by the processor
reside in the very fast memory,
while the data that is only rarely
used resides in the slow memory.
because this way,
you get the speed of a very fast memory,
while you have the size
of a very cheap memory.
To do this correctly is
a very intricate art, and
today computers have whole
hierarchies of caches.
These are called caches, the small,
fast memories called the cache.
Hierarchies of such caches
that are faster and
faster and expensive, more expensive and
more expensive and smaller and
smaller, as they get
closer to the processor.
And, doing that correctly allows
you to really get amazing eh,
effective speed of a very fast memory,
even though there is only a very small
fast memory, and a very large slow memory.
>> Okay.
So, thank you Noam for this explanation.
And indeed from a physical standpoint, we
have many different kinds of memory units.
And we discuss some of them in this
in this perspective discussion.
And yet, it's important to emphasize
that from a logical perspective, all
these different memory systems, you know,
the RAM, the ROM, the Cache, and so on.
They all look alike.
They all, behave like a sequence of
registers which are addressable.
And, we can access any one
of these registers and
do something, with the bit contents of,
of these registers.
So, everything that we
said during this week is
completely applicable to every kind of
memory that we discussed in this unit.